IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005 921
Area-Efﬁcient High-Throughput
MAP Decoder Architectures
Seok-Jun Lee , Member, IEEE , Naresh R. Shanbhag , Senior Member, IEEE , and
Andrew C. Singer , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract— Iterative decoders such as turbo decoders have be-
come integral components of modern broadband communicationsystems because of their ability to provide substantial coding gains.A key computational kernel in iterative decoders is the maximuma posteriori probability (MAP) decoder. The MAP decoder is re-
cursive and complex, which makes high-speed implementations ex-
tremely difﬁcult to realize. In this paper, we present block-inter-
leaved pipelining (BIP) as a new high-throughput technique for
MAP decoders. An area-efﬁcient symbol-based BIP MAP decoderarchitecture is proposed by combining BIP with the well-knownlook-ahead computation. These architectures are compared withconventional parallel architectures in terms of speed-up, memoryand logic complexity, and area. Compared to the parallel architec-ture, the BIP architecture provides the same speed-up with a re-duction in logic complexity by a factor of
, where
 is the level
of parallelism. The symbol-based architecture provides a speed-upin the range from 1 to 2 with a logic complexity that grows ex-ponentially with
and a state metric storage requirement that
is reduced by a factor of
 as compared to a parallel architec-
ture. The symbol-based BIP architecture provides speed-up in therange
to /50
 with an exponentially higher logic complexity
and a reduced memory complexity compared to a parallel archi-tecture. These high-throughput architectures are synthesized in a2.5-V 0.25-
m CMOS standard cell library and post-layout sim-
ulations are conducted. For turbo decoder applications, we ﬁndthat the BIP architecture provides a throughput gain of 1.96 at thecost of 63% area overhead. For turbo equalizer applications, the
symbol-based BIP architecture enables us to achieve a throughput
gain of 1.79 with an area savings of 25%.
Index Terms— Area efﬁcient, block-interleaved pipelining, high
throughput, parallel processing, pipeline, symbol-based decoding,turbo decoder, turbo equalizer.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE TURBO principle ﬁrst introduced in [1] has been
adopted in a variety of communication systems. It has
been shown that turbo decoding schemes for decoding parallelor serial concatenated convolutional codes [2] and low-density
parity check codes [3] approach Shannon’s limit for addi-
tive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. A soft-inputsoft-output (SISO) equalizer can be combined with a SISO
Manuscript received July 17, 2003; revised June 2, 2004. This material is
based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant
CCR 99-79381 and ITR 00-85929.
S.-J. Lee is with the Communication Systems Laboratory, DSP Solution
R&D Center, Texas Instruments Incorporated, Dallas, TX 75243 USA (e-mail:
s-lee8@ti.com).
N. R. Shanbhag and A. C. Singer are with the Coordinated Science Labo-
ratory, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Illinoisat Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (e-mail: shanbhag@uiuc.edu;
acsinger@uiuc.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TVLSI.2005.853604decoder to form a turbo equalizer [4]. In the presence of
intersymbol interference (ISI) caused by frequency selective
channels and high-density read channels, a turbo equalizerprovides additional coding gain beyond that obtained fromseparate equalization and decoding [4]–[8]. Turbo multi-user
detection schemes have also been presented to combat multiple
access interference [9]. These turbo decoding algorithms haveshown remarkable receiver performance improvements overhard decision decoding or separate equalization and decoding
via soft information exchange between two independent SISO
decoding blocks. This performance enhancement has leadturbo codes to be accepted as the coding technique in severalstandards such as Wideband CDMA (WCDMA), the 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) for IMT-2000 [10],
Consultative Committee for Space Applications (CCSDS)telemetry channel coding [11], UMTS [12], DVB-RCS [13],and IEEE 802.16ab.
Turbo decoders are composed of two or more constituent
SISO decoders, which correspond to the component codes em-
ployed in the transmitter, and an interconnection of these con-stituent decoders through an interleaver/deinterleaver. The de-coding algorithm employed in the constituent decoders is the
maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) algorithm. The MAP
algorithm provides a reliability metric, known as the log-like-lihood ratio (LLR), on the transmitted code symbols. The LLRoutput is employed by other constituent decoders, which attempt
to improve their LLR estimates iteratively. However, the use of
iterative processing results in a large computational and storagecomplexity and hence high power dissipation in the receiver.Therefore, low-power and high-throughput implementations for
turbo decoders have recently been investigated [14]–[38] for
wireless and broadband applications.
Several high-throughput VLSI architectures of turbo de-
coders have already appeared [25]–[37]. These high-throughputarchitectures can be classiﬁed into parallel processing
[25]–[33], look-ahead computation [34]–[36], and algorithm re-
formulation approaches [37]. Since the key algorithm employedin the constituent SISO processing blocks of turbo receivers(turbo decoders and equalizers) is the MAP algorithm, most
research works have so far focused on high-throughput MAP
decoder architectures which directly lead to high-throughputturbo receiver implementations. However, the recursive natureof the ACS kernel in MAP decoding algorithms has limited the
reduction of the critical path delay. Hence, parallel processing
[25]–[32] and look-ahead computation architectures [34]–[36]are viewed as practical approaches for high-throughputimplementations.
1063-8210/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 922 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
In this paper, we propose a new critical path reduction
technique referred to as block-interleaved pipelining (BIP),
which leads to a pipelined ACS kernel with less area over-
head compared to conventional high-throughput architectures.
Note that the proposed idea of BIP can be applied along withthe above mentioned high-throughput techniques [25] –[28],
[34]–[37]. We also propose a symbol-based MAP decoding
architecture, where multiple bits are processed as a symbol.
The symbol-based MAP architecture is derived by applyingthe look-ahead transform [39], [40] to the ACS recursion loop.In the context of a turbo equalizer, the symbol-based decoder
architecture enables us to fold the operations of the SISO MAP
equalizer and SISO MAP decoder on to the same hardwareplatform leading to savings in silicon area. We show that thethroughput of the symbol-based decoder architecture can be
improved further by applying the BIP technique. Moreover, we
also provide a detailed comparison of various high-throughputVLSI architectures in terms of their storage requirements, logiccomplexity, throughput gain, and silicon area. These analyses
are validated via physical design examples for turbo decoders
of parallel concatenated convolutional codes (PCCC) and turboequalizers.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the algorithm and VLSI architecture of SISO MAP
decoding and explains the warm-up property which is exploited
in both parallel and BIP architectures. In Section III, the pro-posed BIP transform is presented along with a brief summary
of other architectural transforms that result in high-throughput
implementations of recursive algorithms. In Section IV , weapply the techniques presented in Section III, to develop severalarchitectural solutions for high-throughput MAP decoding.
Section V describes an area-ef ﬁcient high-throughput turbo
decoder for PCCC and turbo equalizer implementations.
II. MAP D
ECODING
In this section, the algorithm for the SISO MAP decoder is
explained ﬁrst, followed by a description of a baseline VLSI
architecture for a SISO MAP decoder.
A. Algorithm
Consider an
 convolutional code. An encoder is
aﬁnite state machine with
 memory elements that en-
codes a
 -bit data symbol into an
 -bit code symbol as shown
in Fig. 1(a). The parameter
 is called the constraint length of
the code, and the code rate is de ﬁned as
 .G i v e n
a current state
 and an input symbol
 , there exists a
unique pair consisting of a next state variable
 and an
output symbol
 . Hence, for an input block of
 data sym-
bols
 , the encoder starts from an initial
state
 at time
 and performs
 state transitions while
generating
 coded output symbols
 .
An ef ﬁcient method describing all possible state transitions is a
trellis diagram. A section of the trellis of Fig. 1(a) is depicted in
Fig. 1(c), where solid edges correspond to
 and dashed
edges correspond to
 .
Note that a discrete-time channel model [see Fig. 1(b)] can be
considered as a (1,1,3) convolutional encoder, where the coded
Fig. 1. Various encoder forms for MAP decoding. (a) A (2,1,3) convolutional
encoder with two memory elements and modulo 2 adders. (b) A discrete
time channel model with two memory elements and the channel vector
/104 /61/91 /104
 /59/104
 /59/104
 /93. (c) A trellis section resulting from state transitions of the
encoders in (a) and (b).
symbol is computed as
 . Hence, the dis-
crete-time channel causing ISI can be decoded via the decoding
algorithm used for the code in Fig. 1(a).
The observed sequence
 at the re-
ceiver is distorted due to transmission over AWGN and/or ISI
channels. Thus, the decoding problem can be de ﬁned as deter-
mining the transmitted sequence
 given the noisy sequence
 .
Maximum likelihood (ML) decoding algorithm estimates thetransmitted symbols via searching the most likely trellis tran-
sition path which maximizes the probability
. However,
the MAP decoding algorithm determines each of symbols
 in-
dependently via maximizing a posteriori probability
 .
The BCJR algorithm [41] solves the MAP decoding problem
in a multiplicative form. From an implementation perspective,
a log-domain MAP algorithm, called “log-MAP ”, has the ad-
vantage that it can be formulated in terms of sums rather thanproducts.
A log-MAP decoding algorithm estimates the LLR of data
symbol
denoted as
 deﬁned below:
(1)
Deﬁning
 , we rewrite
 as
(2)
Typically, one term will dominate each sum leading to an
approximation
(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. LEE et al. : AREA-EFFICIENT HIGH-THROUGHPUT MAP DECODER ARCHITECTURES 923
The log-domain probability
 can be reformulated [23]
as
(4)
where
 and
 are the observed sequence before and
after the
 th trellis section. The ﬁrst term,
 , referred
to as the forward metric , is related to the probability that the
trellis reaches
 given the past observation
 . The for-
ward metric
 is computed recursively as
(5)
by performing a forward sweep on the trellis from
 . The
second term in (4),
 , is referred to as the branch
metric and is related to the probability that a transition from
to
 occurs. The branch metric
 is computed
from the channel output, noise statistics, and the error-free
output of the branch connecting
 and
 at time
 . Note
that each trellis section has
 possible transitions. The third
term
 , referred to as the backward metric , is related to
the probability that the trellis reaches state
 given the future
observation
 . The backward metric
 is computed
recursively as
(6)
by performing a backward sweep on the trellis from state
 .
Hence, the decoding process consists of three steps. First,
branch metrics in each trellis section are computed. Second,
the forward and backward metrics (
 and
 ) are computed
recursively via (5) and (6). Third, the LLR
 is computed
as
(7)
It is known that if the function
 deﬁned as
(8)
is employed instead of
 , the performance of the log-domain
MAP algorithm approaches that of the BCJR algorithm [23] towithin 0.05 dB. The second term in (8) is referred to as the
correction factor .
B. MAP Decoder Architectures
Numerous architectures can be employed to implement the
log-MAP algorithm [43]. However, the trellis sweep over all
observed symbols requires large memory in order to hold the
forward and backward metrics until they are used in the LLRcomputation in (7). Hence, the sliding window log-MAP algo-
rithm, considered in this paper, has become popular as it mini-
mizes the metric storage requirements [23].
The sliding window log-MAP decoding algorithm is derived
via the property that the forward and backward metrics
and
Fig. 2. Scheduling of state metric recursions for /11
and /12
in the sliding
window log-MAP. For simplicity, it is assumed that the computation and
warm-up period equals /76. Shadowed region indicates the computation and
storage of /12
. The gridded region indicates the computation of /11
followed by
the computation of /3/40 /117
 /41. Here, /12
and /12
are the ﬁrst and second /12-recursion
outputs, respectively, at a time index /107.
Fig. 3. Baseline VLSI architecture of a sliding window log-MAP decoder.
Fig. 4. Add-Compare-Select (ACS) unit.
converge after a few constraint lengths have been traversed in
the trellis, independent of the initial conditions [23]. We refer tothis property as the warm-up property and the warm-up period
is assumed to have a duration of
symbols. Due to the warm-up
property, the state metrics (
 and
 ) computation can be parti-
tioned into windows of size
 . Further, the computations in each
window can be done in parallel. Fig. 2 shows an example of a
decoding ﬂow where the warm-up property is employed only
for computing backward metrics. The warm-up or initializationperiod is depicted by dashed lines and the computation periodby solid lines. This warm-up property will be exploited later in
deriving parallel and BIP architectures.
Fig. 3 shows the VLSI architecture of a decoder whose
data- ﬂow graph is shown in Fig. 2. The architecture has units
for the computation of branch metrics (
-unit), one forward
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 924 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
Fig. 5. Parallel processing. (a) Original. (b) Sub-block parallel architecture.
recursion (
 -unit), two backward recursions and a buffer to
store backward metrics
 and
 (
-unit), and the
 metric
processing unit (
 -MPU). The computations in
 -MPU and
-MPU can be implemented in a feedforward manner and
thus these do not limit the throughput. However, the forwardand backward recursions are computed via an array of ACSkernels in a state-parallel manner. An ACS kernel is depicted
in Fig. 4, where the correction factor in (8) is implemented via
a look-up-table (LUT) and state metric re-scaling is employedto avoid over ﬂows [14]. Therefore, it is the critical path delay
of the ACS unit shown in Fig. 4 that limits the throughput.
III. B
LOCK -INTERLEA VED PIPELINING TECHNIQUE
In this section, we present techniques for improving the
throughput of recursive data- ﬂow graphs. First, we review
the existing techniques of parallel processing [25], [26] andlook-ahead transform [39], [40]. Then, we present the BIPtechnique, which is one of the contributions of this paper. These
techniques are applied to design high-throughput MAP decoder
architectures in Section IV .
A. Parallel Processing
In general, pipelining or parallel processing becomes dif ﬁ-
cult for a recursive datapath. However, if the data is being pro-
cessed in blocks and the processing satis ﬁes the following two
properties: 1) computation between blocks are independent and2) computation within a block is recursive, then a block par-allel processing architecture can be achieved. Further, if a block
can be segmented into computationally independent sub-blocks,
parallel processing can be applied at the sub-block level leadingto high-throughput architectures presented in [25] and [26].
Consider the recursive architecture in Fig. 5(a). Note that the
architecture in Fig. 5(a) cannot be easily pipelined or paral-
lelized due to the presence of the feedback loop. However, if adata block of length
is processed independent of other blocks
and the computations within a block can be segmented into com-
putationally independent sub-blocks, then one can parallelize
the architecture as shown in Fig. 5(b), where the parallelizationfactor
and a block
 is divided into
 sub-blocks,
and
 . It is obvious that the critical path is not affected and
the throughput is increased by a factor of
 at the expense of a
factor of
 increase in hardware complexity.
B. Look-Ahead Transform
Another transform to achieve high-throughput for recursive
data- ﬂow graphs is look-ahead computation [39]. Look-ahead
Fig. 6. Look-ahead transform.
leads to an increase in the number of symbols processed at each
time step as shown in Fig. 6, where two symbols are processedin one clock cycle. If
and
, then look-ahead results in the output being
expressed as
 . Note that
 will
have a longer critical path delay than the original computation ofFig. 5(a). However, it has been shown that the function
can
be optimized via logic minimization so that an overall increase
in throughput can be achieved. For example, in the context ofViterbi decoding, it has been shown that a 1.7 times increase inthroughput is feasible via radix-4 computation [40].
C. Block Interleaved Pipelining (BIP)
The parallel architecture in Fig. 5(b), where the level of
parallelism is equal to 2, has two identical computation units
processing on two independent input symbols. Therefore, the
hardware complexity increases linearly with the level of par-allelism
. To achieve an area-ef ﬁcient implementation, we
propose the block interleaved pipelining (BIP) technique. First,
the data- ﬂow of Fig. 5(b) is folded [39] to a single computation
unit as shown in Fig. 7(a) where two independent computationsare carried out in a single computational unit. Note that theresulting BIP architecture in Fig. 7(a) is inherently pipelined.
Therefore, an application of retiming [39] [see Fig. 7(b)] results
in reduction of the critical path delay by a factor of two overthat of the original architecture in Fig. 5(a). It is clear that theretimed BIP architecture in Fig. 7(b) leads to high-throughput
at the cost of a marginal increase in memory due to pipelining
latches when compared to the architecture in Fig. 5(a).
The BIP technique is applicable to general recursive
data- ﬂow graphs that satisfy the following two properties: 1)
computation is block-based with computation between the
blocks being independent and 2) operations within a blockis recursive. Further, if block computation can be partitionedinto sub-block computation via algorithmic transforms while
maintaining independence between sub-blocks, the BIP can
be applied in a sub-block level. In such a case, processing
sub-blocks in a parallel manner leads to the BIP architecturewhich is inherently pipelined.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. LEE et al. : AREA-EFFICIENT HIGH-THROUGHPUT MAP DECODER ARCHITECTURES 925
Fig. 7. Block-interleaved pipelining (BIP). (a) BIP architecture. (b) Retimed BIP architecture.
Fig. 8. Parallel architecture. (a) Scheduling for parallel sub-block processing
with /77 /61/50. (b) VLSI architecture with /77-level parallel sub-block processing.
IV . H IGH-THROUGHPUT MAP D ECODER ARCHITECTURES
In this section, we apply the techniques in Section III to
develop parallel, BIP, symbol-based, and symbol-based BIPdecoder architectures.
A. Parallel Architecture
Due to the warm-up property of MAP decoding described in
Section II-B, a block of
information bits can be segmented
into
 sub-blocks with the warm-up period
 overlapped
among sub-blocks. Thus, by employing the parallelizationtechnique in Section III-A,
identical processing units are
implemented in parallel. This sub-block parallel architecturewas presented in [25] –[28] and leads to a linear increase in
hardware complexity for a linear speedup in throughput. Forexample, a block size of
can be divided into
sub-blocks of size
 . Thus, the
 trellis sections between the
th and
 th trellis nodes are used as the warm-up period for
the
 recursion of the second sub-block. Fig. 8(a) shows the
data- ﬂow for an example with
 and
 . Note that
Fig. 9. BIP architecture. (a) /77-level BIP architecture. (b) BIP ACS
architecture.
the beginning and ending states of the trellis are known to the
decoder and hence warm-up period is not required for the ﬁrst
and last computation windows. Fig. 8(b) depicts an
 -level
parallel architecture.
B. BIP Architecture
Following the approach described in Section III-C, the BIP
architecture is obtained by processing
 sub-blocks of size
. For simplicity, we refer to this architecture as a BIP ar-
chitecture even though the interleaving is done at the sub-blocklevel and we assume that the block-size
and the sub-block
size
 is a multiple of the warm-up period
 .
Fig. 9(a) depicts the BIP architecture, where the
 ,
, and
MPUs are pipelined in order to reduce the critical path delay
and
 delay-line blocks are required to compute
 sub-blocks
in a block-interleaved order. The
 and
 units have the folded
block-interleaved ACS architecture shown in Fig. 9(b), wherethe block-interleaving factor is
. The BIP architecture pro-
cesses trellis sections
in consecutive clock cycles. Compared with the con-
ventional implementation in Fig. 4, the block-interleaved ACSarchitecture in Fig. 9(b) has
delays in the feedback loop of
the ACS recursion. Thus, retiming can be employed to pipeline
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 926 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
Fig. 10. Proposed symbol-based decoding scheme for a example with /91/53 /59 /55/93
RSC encoder.
the critical path by
 levels in order to achieve speed-up by a
factor of
 . The price we pay is an increase in the pipelining
registers. Hence, the BIP architecture will consume less areathan the parallel architecture.
C. Symbol-Based Architecture
We apply an
-level look-ahead transform to the
 and
 re-
cursions. Doing so enables us to compute the
 and
 metrics
by merging
 trellis sections and to decode
 bits per each clock
cycle [40]. We refer to this approach as symbol-based MAP
decoding. For simplicity, a 2-bit symbol decoding, where twotrellis sections are grouped (see Fig. 10), is described next. Ex-tension to the multi-bit symbol case is straightforward.
We reformulate the
recursion in (5) by applying a two-level
look-ahead transform as follows:
(9)
since the
 operation is associative and addition distributes
over
 . Here,
 is the branch metric of the path
connecting
 and
 . In a similar way, the
 recursion in (6)
is rewritten as
(10)
In order to compute
 via 2-bit symbol decoding, either
or
 in (7) can be extended to
 or
 . Here, we
extend the
 recursion. Employing (5), we substitute for
in (7) as follows:
(11)and since
 operation is associative and addition distributes
over
 ,w eh a v e
(12)
Similarly,
 can be computed as
(13)
Theﬁrst term in (13) can be expressed as
(14)
where
 corresponds to the transition with
 and
.B yd e ﬁning symbol reliability metric
 as
(15)
we can compute
 and
 as follows:
(16)
Note that LLR outputs of (16) equal those computed from the
bit-wise decoding algorithm in (7). The modi ﬁed ACS architec-
ture and the
 -MPU are depicted in Fig. 11. In general, (16) can
be derived for an
 -bit symbol-based decoding as follows:
(17)
where
 is the symbol made up of bits from
to
 and
 . Although the symbol-based
decoding increases the number of decoded bits per clock cycle,the critical path delay is increased as shown in Fig. 11. How-ever, this architecture reduces the storage requirement for statemetrics by a factor of
.
In general, assuming that
 and
 are equal to delays of
an adder and a
 , respectively, and the delay of the re-scaling
block is negligible, the critical path delay of
 -bit symbol-based
algorithm equals
 as shown in Fig. 11. The expected
speed-up
 is written as
(18)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. LEE et al. : AREA-EFFICIENT HIGH-THROUGHPUT MAP DECODER ARCHITECTURES 927
TABLE I
STORAGE REQUIREMENT ,LOGIC COMPLEXITY ,CLOCK FREQUENCY ,AND SPEED -UPO F HIGH-THROUGHPUT ARCHITECTURES
Fig. 11. Symbol-based architectures with /114 /61/50 for: (a) ACS recursion, and
(b) the /3-MPU.
where the numerator and the denominator in (18) are the compu-
tation times for processing a block of
 bits using the ACS ar-
chitectures of Fig. 4 and Fig. 11, respectively. In general,
and hence a speed-up in the range of
 is ex-
pected at the cost of an increase in logic complexity due to thelook-ahead transform. In a typical scenario, without any logicoptimization, we get
. Hence,
 approaches 1.5
asymptotically as
 increases. Employing appropriate logic op-
timizations, it is possible to reach
 as shown in [40] for
a Viterbi decoder.
D. Symbol-Based BIP Architecture
In order to increase the throughput gain of the symbol-based
decoding architecture, we apply an
 -level BIP transform alongwith an
 -level look-ahead transform. First, a block is divided
into
 sub-blocks using the warm-up property and a
 -bit
symbol-based decoder is employed to process each sub-block.Then, the
identical symbol-based decoders are folded on to
a single hardware unit resulting in a
 -level pipelined
 -bit
symbol-based decoder. Retiming the
 latches results in a
symbol-based BIP decoder architecture. The symbol-based BIParchitecture has a speed-up of
(19)
Thus, the symbol-based BIP is expected to achieve the highest
speed-up among the above mentioned architectures. Thesymbol-based BIP architecture is same as the architecture ofFig. 9(a) except for the fact that the
-MPU,
 -MPU,
 -MPU,
and
 -MPU have symbol-based datapaths.
E. Comparison
Table I summarizes the storage requirement, logic com-
plexity, clock frequency, and expected speed-up of eachhigh-throughput architecture, where
-level parallelism is
considered,
 is the number of states in the trellis,
 ,
 ,
, and
 are precisions of branch metrics, state metrics,
received symbol
 , and LLR, respectively. As mentioned
previously, the hardware complexity including the storagerequirement and logic complexity of the parallel processingarchitecture increases linearly with speed-up
. Compared to
the parallel architecture, the BIP architecture provides the samespeed-up with a reduction in logic complexity by a factor of
.
The symbol-based architecture provides a speed-up in the range
1 to 2, with a logic complexity that grows exponentially with
but with a state metric storage requirement that decreases
by a factor of
 as compared to a parallel architecture. The
symbol-based BIP architecture has a speed-up in the range
to
 with a logic complexity that increases exponentially
with
 and a state metric memory complexity that decreases
roughly by a factor of
 .
We estimate the area based on a complexity analysis in
Table I. A standard cell-based design methodology is con-sidered. Actual areas of a 1-bit adder, 1-bit latch,
, and
1-bit buffer cell are obtained from a 0.25-
 m CMOS standard
cell library, and precisions are determined via computer sim-ulations (
,
 ,
 , and
 ).
The interconnect area is not included. For
 and
 , the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
Fig. 12. SISO MAP decoder area comparison.
estimated silicon area, computed from Table I, is shown in
Fig. 12 in terms of the normalized area, which is de ﬁned as
the ratio of the area of the high-throughput architecture overthat of the original architecture
. The BIP architecture
consumes 65% –80% of the area of the parallel architecture for
and
 . The symbol-based BIP architecture occupies
30% and 7% more area than the parallel architecture for
and
 , respectively, for
 . However, the normalized area
increases exponentially with
 and hence the symbol-based
BIP architecture is not considered as practical for
 .
Different memory access patterns for input and output mem-
ories (interleavers/deinterleavers in turbo decoders and equal-izers) should be considered for each different high-throughputMAP architecture. In case of an
-level parallel architecture,
the clock frequency is
 , which is same as that
of a nonparallel MAP decoder architecture, but at each clock
symbols need to be decoded in parallel. Thus,
 memory ac-
cesses are executed within
 period unless input and
output memories are partitioned and accessed in parallel suchthat no access con ﬂict occurs. The symbol-based architecture
has the same problem that
memory accesses are executed
during
 period, but the clock period is increased
approximately by a fact of
 . On the other hand, the BIP ar-
chitecture needs one memory access per one clock cycle, butthe clock period is reduced by a fact of
in comparison with
Fig. 13. Block diagram of a PCCC encoder and a turbo decoder. Here /73and
/73
 denote block interleaving and deinterleaving, respectively.
Fig. 14. Serial VLSI turbo decoder architecture.
a parallel architecture. Since the memory and logic clock net-works are synchronized with one clock source, the BIP archi-tecture requires more simple clock networks than the paralleland symbol-based architectures.
In summary, the parallel and symbol-based decoder architec-
tures improve throughput at the expense of increased area. Thearea increases linearly and exponentially with the speed-up
for the parallel and symbol-based architectures, respectively.The BIP reduces this area penalty without sacri ﬁcing the
throughput gains.
V. A
PPLICATIONS
In this section, the proposed high-throughput MAP decoder
architectures are employed for high-throughput implementa-tions of turbo decoders and turbo equalizers, and architectural
bene ﬁts of each approach are compared.
A. Turbo Decoder
The turbo code considered in this paper is made up of two re-
cursive systematic convolutional (RSC) encoders concatenatedin parallel as shown in Fig. 13. The bit sequences transferredfrom one encoder to the other are permuted by an interleaver.
The decoder contains two SISO MAP decoders which are asso-
ciated with two RSC encoders as depicted in Fig. 13. The de-coding of the observed sequences is performed iteratively viathe exchange of soft output information
between the
constituent decoders. The decoding process is repeated itera-
tively until a proper stopping criterion terminates the iterations.
The turbo decoder can be implemented via a serial architec-
ture as shown in Fig. 14, where one SISO MAP decoder is time-
shared. Hence, increasing the throughput of the SISO MAP de-coder directly leads to an overall improvement in throughput ofthe turbo decoder. Based on the area estimation results in Table I,
it is predicted that BIP MAP decoder architecture achieves the
best speed-up at the minimum area cost for the turbo decoderimplementation.
In order to validate our analysis, three high-throughput MAP
decoders were designed using the techniques in Section IV .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. LEE et al. : AREA-EFFICIENT HIGH-THROUGHPUT MAP DECODER ARCHITECTURES 929
TABLE II
TURBO DECODER APPLICATION RESULTS
Fig. 15. Transmitter and receiver model of turbo equalizer. The superscripts
/69and /68denote equalizer and decoder, respectively.
These decoder architectures were implemented in VHDL for
and
 and their functionality was veri ﬁed. The speed-up
factor was
 in all cases. Encoder polynomials were
chosen to be
 and
 for
and
 , respectively. The design was synthesized using the
Synopsys Design Compiler using 2.5-V 0.25-
 m CMOS tech-
nology standard cell library. The synthesized design was placed
and routed using the Cadence Silicon Ensemble .Pathmill was
used to determine the critical path from post layout simulations.Measured results on the critical path delay, speed-up, siliconarea, and throughput are summarized in Table II. The measured
normalized area is close to the predicted results in Fig. 12, and
the measured memory and logic areas clearly show that the BIPtechnique reduces the logic complexity nearly by a factor of
keeping the memory complexity same as the parallel pro-
cessing. As we predicted previously from the analysis, the BIP
architecture achieves high-throughput with minimal area cost.It should be noticed that the BIP symbol-based decoding archi-tecture shows the maximum throughput gain for two-level par-
allelism
as expected in Section IV-D. However, as
 is
increased, the logic complexity is expected to increase expo-nentially (see Fig. 12). Hence, the BIP symbol-based decodingarchitecture does not provide a good tradeoff between the area
overhead and the throughput gain for large values of
.
B. Turbo Equalizer
In the case where the transmitted symbols are protected by
RSC encoders (see Fig. 15), the equalizer and decoder modulescan be related in the same way as in turbo decoding of seri-ally concatenated convolutional codes [2], [4]. Hence, in order
to achieve iterative processing gain, the SISO MAP equalizer is
employed and provides the SISO MAP decoder with soft out-puts
as depicted in Fig. 15. If a binary phase shift
keying (BPSK) modulation is concatenated with an RSC en-
coder in Fig. 15, one SISO MAP decoder can be shared to im-
plement both SISO MAP equalizer and decoder as in a serial ar-chitecture (Fig. 14). However, if quadrature phase shift keying(QPSK) modulation is employed, then the MAP SISO equal-
Fig. 16. Decoding ﬂow of the conventional turbo equalizer implementation.
izer processes one QPSK symbol, composed of two bits, but the
SISO MAP decoder decodes one bit at each clock. Hence, theequalizer and the decoder need separate hardware platforms as
they have different trellis structures. Furthermore, since block-
based equalization and decoding are carried out iteratively be-tween two SISO blocks, one of the blocks, either the equalizer
or the decoder, is in an idle state as shown in Fig. 16. This inef-
ﬁcient use of computational resources can be overcome by em-
ploying the proposed symbol-based MAP decoder.
Fig. 17 depicts the proposed area-ef ﬁcient VLSI architecture
for turbo equalizers, where instead of two separate MAP equal-
izer and decoder a single symbol-based MAP decoder is em-ployed thereby both achieving the dual goals of saving area andfully utilizing the hardware resources. Since the equalizer pro-
cesses the received symbols from the channel and LLR values
on each bit from the SISO decoder, the branch metric of theSISO MAP equalizer is computed as
(20)
if
else
(21)
where a symbol
 is made up of
 bits,
 ,
and the channel length is
 . On the other hand, the branch
metric of SISO MAP decoder is de ﬁned as
(22)
where one code symbol is composed of
 bits. Thus, Fig. 17
has two branch metric computation units, but other computationunits such as
,
, and
 are shared.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 930 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
Fig. 17. Proposed area-ef ﬁcient VLSI architecture for turbo equalizers.
Fig. 18. Predicted area ratio /26for two different scenarios: (a) QPSK /40 /114 /61/50 /41 , /108 /61/51, and (b) 8-PSK /40 /114 /61/51 /41 , /108 /61/50.
Though the parallel processing transform can be applied in
addition to symbol-based decoding for improving throughput,
the BIP symbol-based decoder consumes much less silicon area,and hence provides the better trade off between throughput gainand area cost. In this paper, we compare the area-ef ﬁcient high-
throughput turbo equalizer architecture with the conventional
architecture where two SISO MAP equalizer and decoder areseparately implemented.
1) Area: By following the approach of Section IV-E, we can
predict the normalized area of the area-ef ﬁcient high-throughput
turbo equalizer over that of the conventional architecture.The normalized area
is given by
(23)
where
 is the area of the proposed area-ef ﬁcient high-
throughput architecture employing the symbol-based BIPprocessing and
and
 are the area of MAP equalizer
and decoder for the separate implementation of two SISOMAP blocks. The predicted normalized area is computed using
Table I and plotted in Fig. 18 for two examples where a MAP
equalizer is considered for QPSK modulation with the channellength
(
 states) and 8-PSK modulation with
the channel length
 (
 states). It is observed that
the normalized area is minimized when the number of states in
the equalizer and decoder are equal. Further, as the differencebetween the numbers of states of two SISO blocks is increased,the normalized area increases. This is because the proposed
symbol-based SISO decoder is designed to accommodate the
larger of the two trellises.
2) Speed-Up: The processing time required for one block
iteration of equalization and decoding is expressed as
(24)
where
 and
 are the critical path delays of SISO MAP
equalizer and decoder, respectively. Assuming that the equalizerprocesses
-bit symbols and hence,
 , the speed-up
 is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. LEE et al. : AREA-EFFICIENT HIGH-THROUGHPUT MAP DECODER ARCHITECTURES 931
Fig. 19. Turbo equalizer core layouts. (a) Conventional architecture with separate equalizer and decoder. (b) Symbol-based architecture with /114 /61/50 .
(c) Symbol-based BIP architecture with /77 /61 /114 /61/50.
TABLE III
TURBO EQUALIZER APPLICATION RESULTS
the ratio of
 of the conventional approach over the proposed
high-throughput architecture
where
 extra cycles are caused by a block-interleaved
computation and
 is the critical path delay of the proposed
high-throughput architecture. Note that the speed-up
 becomes
larger as
 gets closer to
 .
3) Experimental Results: We employ a RSC encoder at the
transmitter with a generator polynomial
 . The
coded bit stream is mapped to four-level pulse amplitude mod-
ulation signals. We considered a static channel model,
, and hence 16 states exist in each
SISO equalizer and decoder. The conventional and proposed ar-
chitectures were designed in VHDL, then synthesized via the
Synopsys Design Compiler , and placed and routed via the Ca-
dence Silicon Ensemble by using 2.5-V 0.25-
 m CMOS stan-
dard cell library. The core layouts are shown in Fig. 19. The area
and the critical path delay of each architecture are summarized
in Table III, where the parallel architecture occupies two timesarea of Fig. 19(a). The throughput is improved by 1.79 while25% less area is consumed compared with the conventional ap-proach. The measured normalized area matches well with re-
sults of Fig. 18.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented BIP and symbol-based
BIP architectures as being area ef ﬁcient and providing
high-throughput. Further, we synthesized the VLSI archi-
tectures in a 2.5-V 0.25-
 m CMOS process and demonstrated
that the proposed architectures achieved the dual goals of highthroughput and area- ef ﬁciency for turbo decoders and turbo
equalizers.
Future work needs to be directed toward further improving
the area-ef ﬁciency and throughput gains exploiting circuit-level
optimization techniques. Developing ef ﬁcient interleaver archi-
tectures is of interest. New architectures based on factor-graph
representations of iterative decoders are also a promising area
of research.
R
EFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit
error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes, ”inProc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Communications , Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp.
1064 –1070.
[2] S. Benedetto et al. ,“A soft-input soft-output maximum a posteriori
(MAP) module to decode parallel and serial concatenated codes, ”Jet
Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, TDA Progress Rep. 42-127, 1996.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes . Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1963.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 932 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 8, AUGUST 2005
[4] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and
A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference:
Turbo-equalization, ”Eur. Trans. Telecommun. , vol. 6, pp. 507 –511,
Sep.–Oct. 1995.
[5] A. Glavieux, C. Laot, and J. Labat, “Turbo equalization over a frequency
selective channel, ”inProc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics ,
Sep. 1997, pp. 96 –102.
[6] M. T üchler, R. Koetter, and A. Singer, “Turbo-equalization: Principles
and new results, ”IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 754 –767,
May 2002.
[7] T. Souviginer et al. ,“Turbo decoding for PR4: Parallel versus serial
concatenation, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications , Vancouver,
Canada, Jun. 1999, pp. 1638 –1642.
[8] Z. Wu and J. M. Ciof ﬁ,“Turbo decision aided equalization for magnetic
recording channels, ”inProc. Global Telecommunication Conf. , 1999,
pp. 733 –738.
[9] X. Wang and H. Poor, “Iterative (turbo) soft interference cancellation
and decoding for coded CDMA, ”IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 47, no. 7,
pp. 1046 –1061, Jul. 1999.
[10] Japan ’s Proposal for Candidate Radio Transmission Technology on
IMT-2000: W-CDMA. Japan Ass. of Radio Industries and Business(ARIB). [Online]. Available: http://www.arib.or.jp/IMT-2000/propo-nent
[11] “Telemetry Channel Coding, ”Consultative committee for space data
systems (CCSDS), Blue Book 101.0-B-4, 1999.
[12] “Multiplexing and Channel Coding (FDD) (3G TS2 5.212 Version
3.3.0, Release 1999), ”Universal Mobile Telecommunications Systems
(UMTS), http://www.etsi.org, 1999.
[13] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, N. Brengarth, J. Tousch, and N.
Pham, “The turbo codec standard for DVB-RCS, ”presented at the 2nd
Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000.
[14] Z. Wang, H. Suzuki, and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation issues of
turbo decoder design for wireless applications, ”Proc. IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Systems (SiPS): Design and Implementation , pp. 503 –512, Oct.
1999.
[15] D. Garrett, B. Xu, and C. Nicol, “Energy ef ﬁcient turbo decoding for
3G mobile, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics Design
(ISLPED’01) , Huntington Beach, CA, 2001, pp. 328 –333.
[16] O. Leung, C. Yue, C. Tsui, and R. Cheng, “Reducing power consump-
tion of turbo code decoder using adaptive iteration with variable supplyvoltage, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics Design
(ISLPED’99) , San Diego, CA, 1999, pp. 36 –41.
[17] A. Matache, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Stopping rules for turbo de-
coders, ”Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, TDA Progress Rep. 42-142,
2000.
[18] P. H. Wu and S. M. Pisuk, “Implementation of a low complexity, low
power, integer-based turbo decoder, ”inProc. Global Telecommunica-
tions Conf. , vol. 2, 2001, pp. 946 –951.
[19] S. Lee, N. Shanbhag, and A. Singer, “Low-power turbo equalizer ar-
chitecture, ”Proc. IEEE Signal Processing Systems (SiPS): Design and
Implementation , pp. 33 –38, Oct. 2002.
[20] D. Garrett and M. Stan, “Low power architecture of the soft-output
Viterbi algorithm, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics
Design (ISLPED’98) , Monterey, CA, 1998, pp. 262 –267.
[21] G. Masera, M. Mazza, G. Piccinini, F. Viglione, and M. Zamboni, “Ar-
chitectural strategies for low-power VLSI turbo decoders, ”IEEE Trans.
Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 279 –285, Jun.
2002.
[22] C. Schurgers, F. Catthoor, and M. Engels, “Energy ef ﬁcient data transfer
and storage organization for a MAP turbo decoder module, ”inProc.
IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics Design (ISLPED’99) , San
Diego, CA, 1999, pp. 76 –81.
[23] A. J. Viterbi, “An intuitive justi ﬁcation and a simpli ﬁed implementa-
tion of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes, ”IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun. , vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 260 –264, Feb. 1998.
[24] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low-power VLSI decoder archi-
tecture for LDPC codes, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Symp. Low Power Elec-
tronics Design (ISLPED’02) , Monterey, CA, 2002, pp. 284 –289.
[25] Z. Wang, Z. Chi, and K. Parhi, “Area-ef ﬁcient high-speed decoding
schemes for turbo decoders, ”IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr.
(VLSI) Syst. , vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 902 –912, Dec. 2002.
[26] J. Hsu and C. Wang, “A parallel decoding scheme for turbo codes, ”in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Circuits and Systems , vol. 4, 1998, pp. 445 –448.[27] B. Bougard, A. Ciulietti, L. V . d. Perre, and F. Catthoor, “A class of
power ef ﬁcient VLSI architectures for high speed turbo-decoding, ”in
Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunication Conf. , vol. 1, 2002, pp. 553 –549.
[28] B. Bougard et al. ,“A scalable 8.7 nJ/bit 75.6 Mb/s parallel concatenated
convolutional (turbo-) codec, ”inIEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf.
(ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers , 2003, pp. 152 –153.
[29] A. Worm, H. Lamm, and N. Wehn, “A high-speed MAP architecture
with optimized memory size and power consumption, ”inProc. IEEE
Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS2000) , 2000, pp. 265 –274.
[30]
,“Design of low-power high-speed maximum a priori decoder ar-
chitectures, ”inProc. Design, Automation and Test in Eur. Conf. Exhibi-
tion, Apr. 2001, pp. 258 –265.
[31] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Design methodology for high-
speed iterative decoder architectures, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing , vol. 3, 2002, pp. 3085 –3088.
[32] ,“VLSI architectures for SISO-APP decoders, ”IEEE Trans. Very
Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst. , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 627 –650, Aug. 2003.
[33] A. Giulietti et al. ,“Parallel turbo code interleavers: Avoiding collisions
in accesses to storage elements, ”Electron. Lett. , vol. 38, no. 5, pp.
232–234, Feb. 2002.
[34] T. Miyauchi, K. Yamamoto, and T. Yokokawa, “High-performance
programmable SISO decoder VLSI implementation for decoding turbocodes, ”inProc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. , vol. 1, 2001,
pp. 305 –309.
[35] M. El-Assal and M. Bayoumi, “A high-speed architecture for MAP de-
coder, ”Proc. IEEE Signal Processing Systems (SiPS): Design and Im-
plementation , pp. 69 –74, Oct. 2002.
[36] M. Bickerstaff, L. Davis, C. Thomas, D. Garret, and C. Nicol, “A2 4
Mb/s radix-4 logMAP turbo decoder for 3GPP-HSDPA mobile wire-less,”IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC) Dig. Tech. Papers ,
pp. 150 –151, 2003.
[37] E. Yeo, S. Augsburger, W. R. Davis, and B. Nikolic, “Implementation of
high throughput soft output Viterbi decoders, ”Proc. IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Systems (SiPS): Design and Implementation , pp. 146 –151, Oct.
2002.
[38] F. Cathoor, S. Wuytack, E. de Greef, F. Balasa, L. Nachtergaele, and
A. Vandecapelle, Custom Memory Management Methodology, Explo-
ration of Memory Organization for Embedded Multimedia System De-
sign. Norwood, MA: Kluwer, 1998.
[39] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems: Design and Im-
plementation . New York: Wiley, 1999.
[40] P. J. Black and T. H. Meng, “A 140-Mb/s, 32-state, radix-4 Viterbi de-
coder, ”IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits , vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1877 –1885, Dec.
1992.
[41] L. Bahl et al. ,“Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol
error rate, ”IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284 –287, Mar.
1974.
[42] J. V ogt, K. Koora, A. Finger, and G. Gettweis, “Comparison of different
turbo decoder realization for IMT-2000, ”Proc. IEEE Globecom , pp.
2704 –2708, 1999.
[43] G. Bauch and V . Franz, “A comparison of soft-in/soft-out algorithms for
turbo detection, ”inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Telecommunications (ICT’98) ,
Jun. 1998, pp. 259 –263.
Seok-Jun Lee (S’96–M’04) was born in Pusan,
Korea, in 1973. He received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees from the School of Electrical Engineering,
Seoul National University (SNU), Seoul, Korea, in
1996 and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering from theUniversity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)
in 2004.
During the summer of 2001 and 2002, he worked
at the Communication Systems Laboratory, DSP
Solution R&D Center, Texas Instruments Inc.,
Dallas, TX, where he was involved in IEEE 802.11 and 802.16 modem devel-
opment. Since September 2004, he has been working on DVB-H and ISDB-T
modem development at the Communication Systems Laboratory, DSP Solution
R&D Center, Texas Instruments Inc., Dallas, TX. His research interests includeVLSI architectures for communication and signal processing systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. LEE et al. : AREA-EFFICIENT HIGH-THROUGHPUT MAP DECODER ARCHITECTURES 933
Naresh R. Shanbhag (M’88–SM’00) received
the B.Tech. degree from the Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi, India, the M.S. degree from
the Wright State University, Dayton, OH, and the
Ph.D. degree from the University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, in 1988, 1990, and 1993, respectively,all in electrical engineering.
From 1993 to 1995, he worked at AT&T Bell
Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ, where he was the
Lead Chip Architect for AT&T ’s 51.84 Mb/s trans-
ceiver chips over twisted-pair wiring for ATM-LAN
and VDSL chip-sets. Since August 1995, he has been with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Coordinated Science Laboratory,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where he is presently a Professor.
His research interests are in the design of integrated circuits and systems forbroadband communications including low-power/high-performance VLSI
architectures for error-control coding, equalization, as well as digital integrated
circuit design. He has published more than 90 journal articles, book chapters,
and conference publications in this area and holds three U.S. patents. He is
also a coauthor of the research monograph Pipelined Adaptive Digital Filters
(Norwood, MA: Kluwer, 1994).
Dr. Shanbhag received the 2001 IEEE T
RANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE
SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) S YSTEMS Best Paper Award, the 1999 IEEE
Leon K. Kirchmayer Best Paper Award, the 1999 Xerox Faculty Award, the
National Science Foundation CAREER Award in 1996, and the 1994 Dar-
lington Best Paper Award from the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society. Since
July 1997, he has been a Distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE Circuits and
Systems Society. From 1997 to 1999 and from 1999 to 2002, he served as an
Associate Editor for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS —II:
ANALOG AND DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING and the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ONVERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) S YSTEMS , respectively. He has
served on the technical program committees of various conferences.
Andrew C. Singer (S’92–M’95–SM’05) was born
in Akron, OH, in 1967. He received the S.B., S.M.,
and Ph.D. degrees, all in electrical engineering and
computer science, from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, in 1990, 1992, and 1996,
respectively.
Since 1998, he has been on the faculty of the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
where he is currently an Associate Professor in the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
and a Research Associate Professor in the Coordinated Science Laboratory.
During the academic year 1996, he was a Post-Doctoral Research Af ﬁliate in
the Research Laboratory of Electronics at MIT. From 1996 to 1998, he was a
Research Scientist at Sanders, A Lockheed Martin Company, Manchester, NH.His research interests include statistical signal processing and communication,
universal prediction and data compression, and machine learning.
Prof. Singer was a Hughes Aircraft Masters Fellow and was the recipient
of the Harold L. Hazen Memorial Award for excellence in teaching in 1991.
In 2000, he received the National Science Foundation CAREER Award and in
2001 he received the Xerox Faculty Research Award. He is currently a member
of the MIT Educational Council, Eta Kappa Nu, and Tau Beta Pi.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Indian Institute Of Technology (IIT) Mandi. Downloaded on January 23,2026 at 09:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 